The Wish-Fulfilling Tree: The Life Story of the Master of Uḍḍiyāna As Found in Padmasambhava’s Sevenfold Cycle of Profundity Chapter One Chapter Two Chapter Three Chapter Four Chapter Five Chapter Six Chapter Seven Chapter Eight Chapter Nine Chapter Ten
Emaho! How marvellous!
I, Padma, shall here present the story of my life—
How I mastered the sacred Dharma of the three vehicles
How my deeds for beings became a constant flow
And how I have unceasingly spun the Wheel of Dharma.
Each and every sentient being of the sixfold classes
Incessantly strays through samsara, confused, unknowing.
Especially in the Age of Strife, the dregs of time,
Beings are steeped in the five poisons and act in errant ways.
To inspire them, difficult as they are to change,
The dharmakāya buddhas directed their attention;
The sambhogakāya buddhas asserted their command;
And the nirmāṇakāya buddhas in conference all agreed
That I, the Lotus Master, should appear in this world, Jambudvīpa.
Perceived by some, I magically appeared in Uḍḍiyāna,
Upon a lotus flower on the waters of Dhanakośa.
Perceived by others, I was the son of Uḍḍiyāna’s king.
Perceived by still others, I descended like a thunderbolt
Onto the peak of Mount Meteoric Iron.
In any case, it was twenty-four years after Śākyamuni’s passing
That Amitābha took the form of a bodhisattva,
The Great Compassionate One, 1 and from his heart
He magically conjured me, Padma, as the letter hrīḥ .
What’s more, I arrived in all the worlds like the rain,
Descending upon countless millions of billions of places.
Indeed, the deeds of the Conquerors surpass the reach of thought:
Who could ever measure them or limit their scope?
Nevertheless, conjured I was to Jambudvīpa,
As the destined son of Uḍḍiyāna’s king.
Over that kingdom I reigned, turning the Wheel of Mahāyāna Dharma,
So that everyone would together realize true awakening.
Then, I journeyed through the lands of India
And learned to perfection the fivefold fields of knowledge. 2
In India, I raised questions on the sūtras with Ānanda,
Buddha Śākyamuni’s close disciple.
In Prabhahasti’s presence I became a renunciant monk,
And studied all the teachings of the triple yogas. 3
Then I went before the master Prahevajra 4
And requested every doctrine on the Heart Essence of the Great Perfection.
And at the feet of master Buddhaguhya,
I received the Secret Essence, Net of Illusion 5 hundreds of times.
At Śrī Siṃha’s feet I then bowed down, 6
Receiving every tantra of Mahottara Heruka. 7
I went before the master Mañjuśrīmitra
And received all the tantras of Mañjuśrī Yamāntaka 8 without exception.
Then I went to Nāgarjuna, the great master,
To request the tantras and sādhanas of Lotus Speech. 9
I visited the great master Hūṃkāra and received
All the tantras and sādhanas for Yangdak, Mind of Perfect Purity. 10
In the presence of the master Vimalamitra
I received the tantras and sādhanas of Amrita Qualities. 11
I went before the master Dhanasaṃskṛta
And requested the tantras and sādhanas of Kīla Activity. 12
Once again, I journeyed back to Prabhahasti
And received from him the hundred thousand verses of the Sublime Knowledge of Kīla . 13
At the feet of Śāntigarbha, the great master,
I received the tantras and sādhanas for Jikten Chötö 14 and Möpa Drakngak. 15
Furthermore, from accomplished masters in great numbers
I received a plethora of empowerments, explanations, and instructions
On a plethora of tantras, statements, and sādhanas
Of the Tripiṭaka 16 and the outer and inner Secret Mantra.
Then I reached perfection in my practice
In India’s eight major charnel grounds and sacred places,
And with diverse siddhi signs, I overcame the hordes of māras.
Above all, when trouble arose at the Vajra Throne 17 of India
By evil-minded teachers preaching extreme beliefs,
I settled it with logic and used my power to defeat them.
Five hundred paṇḍitas then placed me on a throne,
And as the Buddha’s regent I preserved the doctrine for a hundred years.
Later, Vimalamitra, the great paṇḍita, became my successor.
I, Guru from Uḍḍiyāna, went to the land of Zahor,
Where the ruler, in his ignorance, had me burned alive.
I displayed a miracle, transforming the pyre into a lake,
Which set everyone in the kingdom onto the Dharma path.
There I upheld the Buddha’s teachings for two hundred years.
Then I went to attain immortality in Māratika,
And Lord Amitāyus appeared before my eyes
To bestow one hundred and eight sādhanas on longevity.
I then proceeded to the Akaniṣṭha Realm of Dense Array, 18
And to the pure realms of the five buddha families.
There I requested tantras from all the sugatas
And conversed with all the nirmāṇakāya buddhas, who declared:
“There is no buddha apart from this: your mind!”
In the upper practice cave of Yangleshö, 19
In order to attain the siddhi of the Great Seal, 20
I performed the practice of glorious Yangdak Heruka.
Hindrances arose, inflicting pain upon India and Nepal,
So I asked my masters to send me Dharma methods to repel them.
The messengers carried back the Sublime Knowledge of Kīla ,
And by its mere arrival in Nepal, all hindrances were quelled.
Thus, I achieved the supreme siddhi—the Great Seal.
While I was practicing at Yari Gong, Upper Slate Mountain,
Argumentative extremists again challenged the Vajra Throne.
Ḍākinīs appeared before a group five hundred Buddhist scholars,
And told them to send a message to Sūrya Siṃha, the Indian king,
And to his priests, to call me back to the Vajra Throne.
There, I once again defeated all extremist teachers.
With the eight great masters 21 I then travelled to Cool Grove cemetery, 22
And for seven days we remained in meditation there.
On the final night, at the Great Enchanting Mound Stūpa, 23
We were all meditating when we beheld
That the stūpa was glowing with light, sparks flashing—
A ḍākinī 24 appeared and gave us each a casket of treasure teachings.
While I personally received the instructions for the Assembly of Sugatas , 25
Each of the masters also received a mandate of their own.
For a long time we remained at the Vajra Throne, preserving the Dharma.
Then, through the force of aspirations in the past,
Trisong Deutsen, who was a Dharma-upholding king,
Gave rise to deep-felt wishes that a temple be built,
And invited Śāntarakṣita, the great paṇḍita, to pacify the site.
But, while the land was tamed without a problem,
The paṇḍita pretended otherwise and prophesied my arrival;
Three emissaries 26 were thus sent with an invitation and gold.
They requested permission from the Indian king and his priests,
Who discussed whether I should be allowed to come.
Even though the Indian lands were under threat from extremist teachers,
The predicted time had come for spreading Dharma in Tibet.
They decided that I should undertake the journey
And signed the letter; the messengers were sent ahead.
That was when I set out from India.
As I approached central Nepal, the Tibetan gods and demons
Grew concerned—soon all became wracked with worry.
Once again, five more messengers were sent,
And we met in Mangyul; they were the first Tibetans
To have faith in my miraculous abilities.
In Tibet, on the shore of Nyima Khü, Sun Rim Lake,
I bound the yakṣas and rākṣasas under oath.
I bound the Tenma Sisters atop Khala Pass, 27
Gangkar Shamé, 28 Tingmen of Jang
And Tinglomen, 29 and local guardians of Jang. 30
In Tsang at Oyuk, on the dreadful pass of Shang,
I subdued Dorjé Lekpa, 31 and in Yeru and Yönru
The malicious mountain spirits Osham and Tanglha. 32
On sacred Mount Kailash I subdued the gyukar constellation gods, 33
And on Targo’s Snowy Range I bound the zadü planetary demons. 34
At Namtso Chükmo I bound the mentsün medicine ladies 35 to oath,
And at Ma Tsongön I subdued the lumen nāga goddess. 36
At Dentig Cliff I bound the Magyel mountain god, 37
And at Rotam Nakpo, likewise, the mayam plague mothers. 38
In Atarong Gorge I bound the gongpo demons, 39
And at Melung Cliff I subdued the genyen . 40
At Red Wang Shümar I bound the lhatsen warrior deities 41 under oath,
And on Kam’s snowy range, the lutsen warrior nāgas. 42
At Divine Zhakra Peak I bound the kulha body guardians, 43
And at Black Thökar Nakpo I subdued the lhatsen warrior deities.
At Black Trigo Nakpo I bound the gya deities under oath, 44
And at Dark Changra Mukpo, all the gyalpo sovereign spirits 45 under oath.
In Tsawarong Gorge I bound the sadak earth lords under oath, 46
And at La Kangchik, all the theurang hammer-wielders. 47
At the Bo Gorge I bound the lutsen warrior nāgas,
And across the Six Ranges of Nédruk Gang, all the ludü demon nāgas. 48
At Anchung Dzong Fortress the genyen spirits came to greet me,
And at Sengé Dzong I bound the yapang spirits of meadows and crags. 49
At Namkha Dzong I bound the lhanyen spirits 50 under oath,
And at Māra’s Rock of Dükyi Drak, all the barlön deputy spirits. 51
At Mayo Glacier I bound the great nyenchen spirits, 52
And on Poyi Drak Cliff I subdued a dümen demoness. 53
At Khyungto Nakpo I bound a dütsen warrior demon, 54
And at Düri Nakpo Mountain, a dügyal demon king 55 as well.
At the holy site of Buchu 56 I bound the minor lutren nāgas,
And at Lharu Tse I subdued the menial lhatren gods.
At the holy site of Dakpo I bound the gurlha hunting gods, 57
And likewise, at the site of Maldro, all the nāgas.
In the southern land of Mön 58 I bound the mudü demons, 59
And in Sikkim, Land of Crops, the rongdü valley demons 60 as well.
On Lapchi’s snowy range I bound the four semo sisters, 61
And, at the Jamtrin Temple in Kyirong, all the mamo mother goddesses. 62
In the valley of Tsang gods and humans welcomed me,
And everyone in Tölung came to greet me as well;
All along the way there emerged springs of siddhi nectar.
At Drakmar’s Tamarisk Grove, the king came forth to greet me,
And although he was emperor, an emanation of Mañjuśrī,
The veil of his human birth was extremely dense,
And so he failed to see my qualities in full.
High and mighty, full of pride, the king’s attitude was offensive.
Therefore I sang a song of my greatness and displayed my magic.
The emperor’s faith was kindled; he bowed down low
And presented a throne of gold and gifts in great abundance.
All of Tibet’s gods and humans then came to pay their respects.
Then I summoned every god and demon in the kingdom of Tibet,
Gave them orders, bound them to oaths, and consecrated the whole land.
With vajra dance and song of hūṃ , they were brought under my command.
During the daytime, the people laid down Samyé’s foundations,
But the gods and demons built throughout the night.
The Four Great Kings 63 assisted, supervising their work;
And as the walls went up with joyful, clamorous song,
Gods and demons raised them even higher at night than humans by day!
Meanwhile, between the king and nāgas a covenant was made,
And the nāgas were assigned to fill the land with golden dust.
Samyé was constructed according to different designs:
The central temple with three stories was built like Mount Meru,
The two yakṣa temples like the sun and moon,
And the whole was ornamented with the four continents and eight minor isles.
One hundred and eight stūpas placed upon the Iron Mountain wall, 64
And four female dogs of copper were set upon four stone pillars.
The three stories were made in the styles of India, China and Tibet.
Samantabhadra was the central figure in the upper story,
With the maṇḍala of Vairocana’s Awakening . 65
In the middle story, the chief figure was Vairocana,
Surrounded by the deities of the Vajra Space Maṇḍala . 66
Central on the ground floor was the Great Awakened One, 67
With all the buddhas of the ten directions and their closest heirs.
All the temples were consecrated, flower petals strewn,
And wisdom deities descended into every statue for all to see.
Rays of light blazed forth and the sound of music was heard.
All the gods showered down a rain of flowers,
And the nāgas came to offer gifts of precious gems;
Thus the world was filled with every auspiciousness.
The male and female protectors arrived to flank the temple’s sides.
The stone pillars shot forth flames, and the dogs growled and barked.
Three times arura fruits 68 were showered down like rain.
Over all Tibet and Kham 69 auspicious signs and goodness reigned.
Both gods and men were filled with joy, again and yet again—
And so the banner of fame was unfurled across the land.
Then, we, Abbot and Master, 70 conferred together:
“This kingdom of Tibet is a land of savages;
They don’t know good from evil, so how can Dharma’s truth be taught?
Since Tibet’s ministers have become filled with jealousy,
Once the king’s wishes are fulfilled, to our own lands let us return.”
The emperor caught wind of their discussion,
And he grew deeply saddened, shedding many tears.
He then presented us with yet another priceless golden maṇḍala.
“Masters, out of your deepest kindness pay heed!
The wishes of I, Trisong Deutsen, are grand indeed,
For this land of Tibet is savage, shrouded in darkness;
Not a single word of the Dharma here resounds.
Masters, perhaps you’re disappointed, but take pity upon us:
I beg you, please, care for us with your awakened compassion!”
“As enlightened emanations you entered this wretched land,
And, as bodhisattvas, your work is to care for others.
You have no other task than to fulfill the needs of beings.
I, Trisong Deutsen, beseech you—please fulfill my prayers!
“Although I have built shrines for the awakened body, speech, and mind
And brought the Dharma of sūtra and Tantra to Tibet,
It still must spread through study, practice and meditation.
So, masters, please ensure that this takes place!
Abbot, Master, I beseech you both—do not leave; stay here, in Tibet!”
We, Master and Abbot, discussed, and we decided to remain.
I could foresee all those Tibetan children of noble birth
That should be assembled, we taught them how to translate.
From among this multitude, one hundred lotsawas 71 emerged,
Including Ka, Chok and Zhang, 72 and Vairocana above all.
While I led the translation of all the outer and inner tantras,
The Abbot was in charge of all aspects of sūtra and vinaya.
Since the basis for the Dharma is the precious Saṅgha,
Eleven hundred Tibetan youngsters then took the vows of monks.
We then told them the names of each and every Indian master,
And sent the hundred lotsawas off to the land of India.
One hundred great paṇḍitas were invited to Tibet—
Vimalamitra, Buddhaguhya, and others of their kind.
Paṇḍitas, lotsawas, and the Abbot and Master—we took our seats in the temple
Upon beautiful and lofty thrones, all wrapped in rich brocade,
And we were served the finest treats and offered maṇḍalas of gold.
The teachings of sūtra and tantra we translated in their entirety.
The three collections of vinaya, sūtra and abhidharma,
The pāramitā 73 in its longer, medium and shorter forms—
Thus, all the sūtra teachings, without exception, we translated.
The definitive teachings, such as the Mahāparinirvāṇa sūtra — 74
All of them, without exception, we translated.
Kriyā and Yoga tantras such as the Vajra Summit — 75
All the outer tantras, without exception, we translated.
The eight tantras of the Net of Illusion , including the Secret Essence ,
The Scripture of Assembly transmissions, the Mind Section cycles,
The Eight Sādhana Teachings , and the five root tantras
And ten specific tantras, fifteen in all—
An untold number of Secret Mantra’s inner tantras we translated.
Moreover, countless teachings of sūtra and Tantra
Were, day and night, translated, studied, and explained.
Throughout the Tibetan kingdom we established Dharma schools
And compiled sūtras and tantras into myriad volumes.
With parasols and banners, pennants and streamers,
With articles of offering, countless in number,
All so very beautiful and resplendently arranged,
The volumes were carried upon the shoulders of monks,
While in between they carried all kinds of offerings.
The paṇḍitas and lotsawas were seated in horse-drawn chariots,
With parasols floating above and banners at their flanks.
Untold numbers of instruments filled the air with music,
As they circled the temples, led always by fragrant incense.
This was the day when Namkhé Nyingpo displayed miracles,
And all the scriptures were ceremoniously installed in the middle story. 76
Then thrones were erected upon Yobok Meadow
And they were each offered a golden maṇḍala and a golden brick,
A set of garments each, and a roll of silk and wool.
They were offered a horse, a mule, and a male and female dzo, 77
A lamb’s wool coat, a woollen jacket, a leather case, and a block of tea,
As well as a hundred coins of gold, and a thousand pieces of silver, each.
Once these were offered, the king rose from his seat.
He spoke about his royal lineage, Tibetan customs, and his vision,
And he extoll the virtues and kindness of the paṇḍitas and lotsawas.
Then Vimalamitra and other great paṇḍitas spoke
Of the origins of the Dharma and the reasons for its greatness.
Next, Vairocana and the other lotsawas spoke
About the great paṇḍitas’ virtues and the translation of Dharma.
Gö and other ministers also distributed gifts
And spoke of the ways in which their wishes had been fulfilled.
All the citizens, in turn, created merit, each according to their means.
Then the great paṇḍitas, each escorted by their lotsawa,
Embarked upon their journeys home to their own lands.
Like the rising sun, the Dharma now shone upon Tibet.
Then I, the Lotus Master, was engaged in sādhana practice
At the secluded hermitage of Samyé Chimphu, 78
When King Trisong Deutsen, as the monarch of Tibet,
Accompanied by Namkhé Nyingpo and Sangyé Yeshé,
Gyalwa Chöyang and Lady Yeshé Tsogyal,
Palkyi Wangchuk and Dorjé Düdjom,
Vairocana and the other royal subjects
Presented me with maṇḍalas of gold and requested
Repeatedly that I reveal the Assembly of Sugatas maṇḍala.
Then, after I had revealed the maṇḍala to the king and subjects,
I conferred the Assembly ’s grand empowerment upon them.
This was when the monarch’s flower fell upon Mahottara, 79
Namkhé Nyingpo’s flower fell upon Yangdak Heruka,
While Sangyé Yeshé’s flower fell upon Yamāntaka.
Gyalwa Choyang’s flower landed upon Hayagrīva,
And Yeshé Tsogyal’s flower fell upon Kīla.
Palkyi Wangchuk’s flower landed on Mamo,
While Dorjé Düdjom’s fell upon Jikten Chötö,
And Vairocana’s flower landed on Möpa Drakngak.
And so they practiced, each within their destined maṇḍala. 80
The king and disciples all brought forth signs of accomplishment:
Trisong Deutsen overpowered others’ experience with his splendor;
Namkhé Nyingpo rode on the sun’s rays, as though astride a horse;
Sangyé Yeshé plunged his dagger into the solid rock;
Gyalwa Chöyang sent forth horse neighs from his crown;
Yeshé Tsogyal could revive human corpses;
Palkyi Wangchuk caused paralysis by pointing his dagger;
Dorjé Düdjom moved about freely, as fast as the wind;
And Vairocana employed the spirits as his servants.
Indeed, the king and disciples showed many other siddhi signs as well.
Additionally, I gave the ripening empowerments and the liberating instructions
For the myriad maṇḍalas of the Embodiment of the Gurus’ Realization ,
Embodiment of the Yidams’ Realization , Embodiment of the Ḍākinīs’ Realization ,
And the Embodiment of the Protectors’ Realization .
Thus, I spread the teachings for the retreat centers of Tibet.
It was then that I, the Lotus Master, had a realization:
“Here in Tibet, the teachings of both sūtra and Tantra,
Of the outer, inner, and innermost Vajrayāna,
Have been studied, meditated upon, and practiced, siddhi signs achieved.
Yet the essence of them all, an indispensable teaching—
The Ocean of Dharma, the Gathering of Transmitted Precepts 81 —
I must now bestow upon the king and disciples with care.”
It was at that moment that the king, together with the three princes,
Requested me to give it in the expanded way, inside Chimphu Cave.
Later, while I was concealing many treasures of the awakened mind,
The Tibetan emperor, King Trisong Deutsen,
With Muné Tsenpo, who was the senior prince,
And the second prince, whose name was Murup Tsenpo,
And Mutik Tsenpo, the youngest prince,
Along with Gyalwa Chöyang and the Lotsawa of Langdro,
The great Jñānakumara of Nyak, with others,
Vairocana and Palkyi Sengé of Shübu,
Tingdzin Zangpo and Dorjé Düdjom,
Palkyi Wangchuk and Wangchuk of Odren,
Ācārya Salé and Dorjé Tso of Shelkar,
Drokpen Lotsawa and Tsogyal with three servants,
The three brides of the three princes, among others—
All came, each with their following, to Namkha Dzong in Kham.
After unveiling the Ocean of Dharma, the Gathering of Transmitted Precepts ,
I gave the king and disciples the ripening empowerments
And thoroughly explained the essential liberating instructions.
After practicing this one-pointedly for seven years, retinue alongside,
The king could freely move through rocks and mountain,
Muné Tsenpo beheld the deity in person,
Murup Tsenpo gained the wakefulness of greatest bliss,
Mutri Tsenpo saw the very essence of his mind,
Vairocana soared like a bird into the sky,
Gyalwa Chöyang transformed his body into a bonfire,
Könchok of Langdro’s form became a fiery mass of light,
Sangyé Yeshé arrived at the stage of Universal Light,
The great Jñāna of Nyak realized the exhaustion of phenomena,
Kharchen Tsogyal drew immortal nectar out of solid rock,
Salé the Ācārya shattered boulders with bare hand,
Drokmi Palkyi Yeshé’s gaze burned down forests,
Dorjé Düdjom’s gaze evaporated an entire lake,
Tingdzin Zangpo pierced straight into a mountain wall,
Lady Shelkar 82 used the mamo spirits as her servants.
Many were the signs of siddhi displayed by the disciples.
All the scriptures were then written down in magical letters
And concealed as treasures at seven supreme sites.
Moreover, I predicted those who would reveal them,
Sealed them with commands, made wishes, and conferred empowerments.
In the Age of Strife, 83 when the lifespan is but thirty years,
I predicted that these treasures would appear; such is my samaya!
After this, I wrote down all of the profound Dharma teachings
In five kinds of writing upon parchment of five kinds of material,
And inserted it in caskets, extraordinary and wondrous.
In Lhasa, Samyé, and in Yoru Tramdruk,
At the Border Taming and Further Taming Temples, 84
At the Sheldrak Cave of Yarlung and the Lhodrak Cliff of Kharchu,
At the Yangdzong Fortress of Drak, and in Dawaphuk Cave at Yerpa,
In Yamalung Valley and Zabu Valley in Tsang,
At Mount Trapzang and at Riwoché in Tsang,
On Lapchi’s snowy range and Yolmo’s snowy ridge,
At Namkechen and the eight sites of Bhutan,
At Tsari Gyala and the holy site of Sengdam Buwo,
At the extraordinary Drakar Cliff of Tidro,
And at the twenty-five sacred places of Upper and Lower Kham—
Five for awakened form, five for speech, and five for awakened mind,
Five for qualities and five for the awakened activities—
At all these places I practiced, consecrating the sites,
Where I concealed countless treasures, both major and minor.
Even though the teachings now shine like the light of the sun,
Within three generations of the present king’s descendants
There will appear a king with ox-shaped head and malicious plans. 85
That is when, due to a trouble-making minister with raven-like head
The Buddha’s teachings will be torn to the ground.
Afterwards, the royals and disciples now present
Will in the future, owing to their noble aspirations,
Appear as two supreme treasure revealers, 86 twenty Lingpas, 87
Another hundred tertöns, lords of the teachings,
With a thousand and two minor tertöns in their retinue.
Moreover, re-concealed termas will be countless in number.
The propagators of these teachings, doctrine-holding masters,
Will appear by the hundreds, accompanying each great tertön.
Each area will have its own revealer of treasure,
And the places of my sādhana practice will each have a treasure site.
In each district there will appear a siddha of renown,
And every town will have a master as object of veneration.
For each householder there will be a monk, worthy of offerings,
And a yogin to subdue their hindrances and threats.
Thus, in the future, the teachings will fill every corner of the land.
All of this shall be the work of my awakened emanations.
So bring forth pure perception, future people of Tibet and Kham!
Then I declared, “Our teacher Śākyamuni Buddha,
In the Sūtra of Predictions in Magadha , spoke these words:
'The rākṣasas will pour out from the lands of the southwest;
They will invade and extinguish this Jambu continent.’
My work for the Tibetans is now complete, in my direct form,
So I shall go to the southwest, to tame the rākṣasa ogres.”
When the prince 88 heard these words,
He cried out before me, deeply saddened,
And tried to dissuade me from departing.
Out of kindness and to benefit the people of Tibet,
I foretold representatives of my body, hid treasures to represent my speech,
And entrusted my heart-realization to predestined heirs—
As I explained this point, the prince’s sadness disappeared;
And so I decided to travel to the land of rākṣasas.
Everyone escorted me to the mountain pass of Mangyul,
Where I gave my testament to the prince and the Tibetan people,
Along with thirteen pith instructions that clear away obstacles
And protect your descendants, in the form of a prayer, 89
And the inner sādhana with its many applications. 90
These were concealed at Khala Rongo in Mangyul.
All those who could not meet me, all beings of the times to come,
Should study and recite my story of liberation.
Memorize to perfection and understand it to its depths.
When you read this biography during your six sessions,
Bring me to mind, and then call upon me in this way:
“Emaho! Dharmakāya Samantabhadra and Vajradhara, the Sixth,
Vajrasattva, our teacher, and the blessed King of Śākyas,
Lord of Boundless Life, Amitāyus, and All-Seeing Avalokiteśvara—
To you, Padma, who is inseparable from them all, we pray!
In essence, your awakened body is Mañjuśrī Yamāntaka;
In essence, your awakened speech is mighty Hayagrīva;
And, in essence, your awakened mind is Yangdak Heruka—
To you, our Wish-Fulfilling Guru, we pray!
Your overwhelming qualities are Mahottara Heruka;
Your awakened activity Vajrakumāra, in essence;
And you rule over the mamos and ḍākinīs as Ngöndzok Gyalpo—
To you, Supremely Glorious Tötreng Tsal, we pray!
Your form encompasses the illusory net of peaceful and wrathful deities,
The melody of your speech holds the twelve special qualities,
And your unimpeded wisdom pervades everywhere—
To you, Overlord of the Ḍākinīs, we pray!
You foretold representatives of your body, hid treasures for your speech,
You entrusted your heart-realization to destined heirs,
And you left your loving testament for all the Tibetan people—
To you, the kindest of awakened emanations, we pray!
We recall your overwhelming kindness, Guru Rinpoché—
Please remember your promise to hold us in your embrace,
For in these troubled times we have no hope but you.
Look upon us with compassion, awakened emanation of Uḍḍīyana!
With your power and strength, dispel the turbulence of this dark age,
Bestow your blessings and the great empowerment of wisdom,
Increase the strength of our experience and realization,
Grant us powerful skills to benefit the teachings and beings,
And bring us, we pray, to buddhahood in this very life!”